# Sphere v2 Tutorial

## Introduction to miniSphere

The miniSphere game engine developed by @FatCerberus as a successor to Sphere is powerful engine for developing amateur games or experimenting with programming.

Following the example of the original Sphere it is a Javascript virtual machine stapled onto a collection of APIs that can be used for input and output.

In addition to supporting 99% of the features of the original Sphere. miniSphere features a new (v2) API which is very flexible and powerful.

miniSphere also now uses Microsoft's ChakraCore Javascript engine which allows for very high performance Javascript as well as supporting modern JavaScript features EcmaSpec 2017

## Why this tutorial

The original Sphere had several handy tutorials written for it that both a) taught basic ES5 Javascript and b) explained how to begin making various features of a game.

Whilst miniSphere with its v2 API and newer JavaScript is a significant technical upgrade from Sphere it currently has a very limited user base, very few examples and no documentation beyond the API reference.

Additionally to get the most of miniSphere requires knowledge of modern JavaScript which is not widespread.

This tutorial will assume a basic knowledge of programming and will specifically teach key features of EcmaSpec2015-2017+ JavaScript and the Sphere v2 environment and API provided in miniSphere.

Note this will not be an exhaustive reference for any of these topics, but hopefully it will be a useful introduction.

## Contents

1. ModernJavaScript
    - Strict Mode
    - Let and Const
    - Arrow functions
    - Classes
    - Event Loops
    - Promises
    - Async and Await
    - Modules: Import/Export

2. Sphere v2 API