# Core Concepts

## Introduction

The design goals of the Sphere v2 API are rather different to the goals of the Sphere v1 API. The Sphere v1 API was designed to allow a user to create the end effects they wanted fairly quickly.

It did this by taking guesses at what those would be and trying to provide functions to implement them. BUT as a result of this many many functions were created - it is rather large API comprised of individual functions that each generally do one thing.

The aim of the Sphere v2 API is instead to provide a lower level more flexible API so more options are available whilst it is a little harder to get started. The intention is primarily that the API will be used to make libraries and systems of one kind or another which will in turn be used to make games BUT for various simple operations the API will be directly applicable.

(For examples of libraries/systems please review the map engine, sprite engine, input system HUD system and menu system included in this repository)

## System modules

Sphere v2 comes packaged with various system modules which are intended for quick use for various functions. I suggest learning some of the Core API first before diving into using the pre-packaged modules to avoid over complicating things; your use case may have a simpler solution than the system module you're considering.

## Filesystem

Sphere v2 comes with no prescribed folder structure for games, you can define any folder structure you like - as part of this most APIs that involve reading or writing files require you to start your path from one of the defined prefixes:

```
@/ - this indicates the base folder of your game, note if you don't include a prefix this one is assumed.
$/ - this indicates the folder containing your startup script/module
#/ - this indicates the sphere system directory
~/ - this indicates the user's save game folder (normally a folder created in their documents folder)
```

## Cell Scripts

cell which comes with miniSphere is a tool for packaging games, whilst optional it is useful for a number of reasons:

1. It allows you to clearly define what documents belong in released versions of your game (as opposed to in a messier development folder)

2. It allows you to perform scripted transformations/edits on your game when making a release - e.g. my Map Engine uses Cell to reformat map and sprite set files into neater formats to make runtime loading much faster.

3. It could be used to run a transpiler - e.g. TypeScript if wanted.

4. It can package your game as an .spk a single file containing your game and all resources for neat distribution.
