# Setting up your project

## Introduction

As discussed in the Core Concepts tutorial a Sphere v2 project can have any folder structure you like. Which may lead to a question of where to start...

If working on windows you can use the Sphere Studio IDE and create a new v2 project; however if not working on windows there is no Sphere v2 IDE - but that does not mean you can't develop a Sphere v2 game on a different platform.

Fundementally a sphere v2 game requires 2 documents both of which can be made in a text editor:

1. a main script file (.js or .mjs)
2. a game manifest file (.json)

Note for more control and various additional features instead of writing a manifest you can use a cellscript to generate your manifest AND to package your game.

## NOTE: Limitation of non-windows development

Choosing to make a sphere game on Linux or macOS means no usable Sphere IDE which for some people may be a significant barrier to entry. I personally do 95% of my sphere development in the advanced cross platform text editor Microsoft VSCode - which is available for free download - I actually find this nicer than Sphere Studio - though it has some limitations.

The only signficant limitation I've found of not being on windows is that there's no usable map editor for .rmp maps (the old Sphere v1 editor runs under wine but not very well.)

In the near future (hopefully within 1 to 2 months) I intend that my v2 map engine will support Tiled  created maps rather than just .rmp maps. This will fix this issue. In the mean time other aspects of projects e.g. systems of various kinds can be made - or you may well be working on a game that does not need RPG style maps...

## The first step - a cellscript

*Note I will assume throughout that you've decided to use cell and hence make a cellscript instead of a manifest for your game.*

In Sphere studio you'd start by making a new project and specifiying that it is a sphere v2 project. If not using Sphere studio start by making a folder containing a "Cellscript.mjs" file. ThIs needs to contain a few specific things. (There is an example in the Templates folder - though it is more complex than you'll need to begin with).

Elements of a Cellscript:

1. Specifying properties of Sphere.Game this is used for setting details to appear in your game manifest - Important Note - you must not overwrite this object you must write new properties to the already existing object.

2. Running any tools required to prepare your game.

3. Installing resources required by your game with the ```install()``` command.

### Properties of Sphere.Game

The neatest way to do this is with ```Object.assign```:

```js
Object.assign(Sphere.Game,
{
    name1 : value1,
    name2 : value2,
    //etc
});
```

THough if you prefer you can simply do:

```js
Sphere.Game.name1 = value1;
Sphere.Game.name2 = value2;
//etc
```

These two options are equivalent.

There are certain key properties you can set to Sphere.Game which miniSphere will directly use - other text or numerical properties can be added and will be available within your game though there is minimal use for this.

Key properties note most of these have default properties automically supplied i you don't set them, the only 2 you must set are "main" and "resolution":

```js
name: "Name of Game", //defualt "untitled"
author: "Insert your name here",//defualt "none"
summary: "Describe game here",//default "none"
resolution: "640x480",//set this - widthxheight of your game - game wil not run without specifying this
saveID: "testing",//set this - name to use for save file folder (created inside the user's documents/my documents folder if using the save file feature of the sphere v2 api) - NOTE if you don't set this you can't make save files
main: "@/bin/main.mjs",//path to your game's main script - game won't run if you don't set this - NOTE this needs to be where you install() it, not where you edit it
fullScreen: true,//should miniSphere start your game in fullscreen mode - if not provided defaults to false
version : 2, //targeting sphere v1 or v2 - defaults to 2
sandbox : "full", /*specifies what file read/write access your game is allowed defaults to "full" - which means read only access to the game itself and the sphere system folder as well as read/write access to the save file folder. Other options allow the game to edit itself at runtime - almost any distributed game should be in "full" mode - other options "relaxed" or "none" could be useful for making a "game" that is actually a development tool of some kind but should almost never be used otherwise unless perhaps you're trying to make a 4th wall breaking experience of a game that deletes itself like DDLC..."
```

### Running tools

If you look over the template example you'll see use of a tools for .rmp and .rss - the tool api allows reformatting/editing files for distribution or even combining multiple files into one. One call to toolInstance.stage() only creates one output file - hence the runTool function in my example for applying a tool to every file in a folder - a future release of miniSPhere may incorporate an in built equivalent of runTool() but for now it must be explicitly defined.

(Note also in my example the actual functions used for the tools are imported from other files) - Tools are the more advanced side of cell that I reccomend leaving to one side when getting started unless you wish to my map engine in which case just copy and paste my example updating only the file paths.

### Installing resources you require

Each time you run a cellscript it will create a new distributable folder or .spk distributable file for your game. This means that you need to tell cell everything the game will contain.

With tools you can use complex read and write instructions with miniSphere's DataStream and FileStream classes. The simpler mechanism to use with most files though is the ```install()``` command.

The ```install(directory, files)``` command simply copies files from your project folder into the distributable - it takes two parameters:

1. directory - a path to the folder within your game you wish these files to be put in i.e. "scripts" or "images" etc - remember with Sphere v2 you can design any folder structure you like as long as you use it consistently.

2. targets - an array of Targets to install - to create "targets" use the ```files(patten, recursive)``` command - see the template for examples. Note if recursive is true it will look into subdirectories.

In the simplest case you would simply install your game's script files.

## Step 2 A main script file

*Note I will assume that you are working with .mjs files - therefore if you need access to anything defined in a different script you will need to ```import``` it, similarly if your current script needs to provide access to anything it defines to other scripts it must ```export``` it.*

When miniSphere launches your game in v2 mode it will immediately any global code in your main script. It will then also look for a ```default export``` of your main script and run that - if it's a function it will simply call it, if it's a class it will instantiate it then call its ```.start()``` method if it has one.

Use of a ```default export``` from your main script is optional as you can instead run everything from global code - as discussed in the Modules tutorial "global code" is not truly global within a Module. The quesiton is how you'd like to structure your game. With Sphere v1 the engine would always look for a funciton called ```game``` and throw an error if it didn't exist. With Sphere v2 it will always look for a ```default export``` but no error will be thrown if it doesn't exist.

A simple template could look something like this:

```js

//import dependencies here
import something from "./otherFile";


function updateScript()
{
    //run updates here
}

function renderScript()
{
    //draw things here
}

export default
function startGame()
{
    //do setup here
    Dispatch.onUpdate(updateScript);
    Dispatch.onRender(renderScript);
}

```

Alternatively without the ```export default```:

```js

//import dependencies here
import something from "./otherFile";


function updateScript()
{
    //run updates here
}

function renderScript()
{
    //draw things here
}


//do setup here
Dispatch.onUpdate(updateScript);
Dispatch.onRender(renderScript);
```

This example obviously doesn't do anything, but hopefully this is a useful intro to how to structure the beginning of a Sphere v2 game.


## Tip for quick testing

miniSphere can also run js or mjs files directly without a project setup this can be useful for quickly testing ideas and features - though obviously does not provide access to any accompanying data files - simply call spheRun from the command line with the path to a js or mjs file as a parameter.