# Fonts and Text

## Introduction

Text output is useful in testing and in various in game situaitons - talking with other characters, menus etc.

Note the Font API in miniSphere renders the text every time you draw it - if you are drawing the same text over and over and want higher performance drawing it once onto a surface then drawing that surface repeatedly should run faster. (Unlikely to be an issue for most games - but I like optimisation)

## Obtaining a Font Object

To draw any text in miniSphere requires a font object their are two ways to obtain one:

```js
let myFont = Font.Default;
```

This gives you Sphere's system font - ```Font.Default``` is similar to ```GetSystemFont()``` from Sphere v1. For both neatness and performance I reccomend storing the font in a variable of your own as per the above example rather than using Font.Default every time.

```js
let myFont = new Font (pathToFontFile);
```

If you wish to load your own font you do so with the ```Font``` constructor called with ```new``` as per this example. The file will need to be a .rfn file - the same format used for Sphere v1 fonts.

*Please see the notes on file paths in the Core Concepts article.*

## Drawing text

The function to draw Text is:

```js
Font#drawText(surface, x, y, text[, color[, wrap_width]]);
```

*Note the # symbol is used to imply a method that must be used with an instance of the class - this is saying that drawText must be called with ane xisting Font object (created with new Font or obtained from Font.Default).*

Parameters:

1. surface - the surface to draw to, if you wish to draw straight to the backbuffer use Surface.Screen (note I reccomend cacheing this in a variable of your own)

2. x - x coordinate for left hand edge of the text

3. y - y coordinate for top edge of the text

4. text - the text itself - a Javascript string, either a variable containing one or a string literal

5. color - *optional* - a Sphere v2 color object to apply as a mask/highlight to the text

6. wrap_width - *optional* - width to wrap the text at - if not supplied text will not be wrapped

So for a simple example:

```js
let screen = Surface.Screen;
let myFont = Font.Default;

myFront.drawText(screem, 10, 10, "Hello this is some text");
```

Running this on its own will not do anything observable as the text is drawn to the backbuffer not immediately to the screen. To display the text you should draw it within a render function:

```js
let screen = Surface.Screen;
let myFont = Font.Default;

function render()
{
    myFont.drawText(screen, 10, 10, "Hello this is some text");
}

Dispatch.onRender(render);
```

There is a minor problem with this - miniSphere will keep drawing the text and remain open untill forcibly closed as this code has no exist point.

I will cover input in a subsequent tutorial, for now we can use Sphere.sleep to schedule a shutdown.

```js
let screen = Surface.Screen;
let myFont = Font.Default;
let done = Sphere.sleep(300);//create a promise that resolves after 300 frames
done.then(Sphere.shutDown);//when the promise resolves shutDown

function render()
{
    myFont.drawText(screen, 10, 10, "Hello this is some text");
    myFont.drawText(screen, 10, 40, "Sphere will exit in 5 seconds.");
}

Dispatch.onRender(render);
```

We could also colour the text, or wordwrap it - as the game is going to exit quickly how about showing a timer that turns red as the time runs out?

This time rather than using Sphere.sleep I'll use the Js builtin ```Date.now()``` and an update function that will control when to exit.

```js
let screen = Surface.Screen;
let myFont = Font.Default;
let colour = new Color(1, 1, 1); //make a color that's white
let start = Date.now();//Javascript library method to get the computer clock time in miliseconds
let time = 0;

function updateClock()
{
    time = (Date.now() - start); //how much time has passed
    let value = (5000 - time) * 0.0002; //how much green and blue should fade away
    colour.g = value;
    colour.b = value;
    if (time > 5000)
    {
        Sphere.shutDown();
    }
}

function render()
{
    myFont.drawText(screen, 10, 10, "Hello this is some text");
    myFont.drawText(screen, 10, 40, "Sphere will exit in " + (5000 - time) + " milliseconds.", colour);
}

Dispatch.onRender(render);
Dispatch.onUpdate(updateClock);//Dispatch the update function
```

## Moving on

There are a few other font related methods which you can experiment with, I won't include them here as they're documented clearly in sphere2-core-api.txt.

A key different between Sphere v2 Font objects and Sphere v1 is that there is just one drawing function with extra parameters rather than multiple.

Note if you wish to draw enlarged text with Sphere v2 you'll need to draw the text onto a surface and then enlarge the surface.
